feat: Technical review — Related website sets docs (#30500)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/api/storage_access_api/using/index.md

1. We first use feature detection (`if (document.hasStorageAccess) {}`) to check whether the API is supported. If not, we run our code that accesses cookies anyway, and hope that it works. It should be coded defensively to deal with such eventualities anyway.
2. If the API is supported, we call `document.hasStorageAccess()`.
3. If that call returns `true`, it means this {{htmlelement("iframe")}} has already obtained access, and we can run our code that accesses cookies right away.

> 4. If that call returns `false`, we then call {{domxref("Permissions.query()")}} to check whether permission to access third-party cookies has already been granted (i.e. to another same-site embed). We wrap this whole section in a [`try...catch`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/try...catch) block because Safari doesn't support the `"storage-access"` permission, which can cause the `query()` call to throw. If it throws, we report that to the console and try running the cookie code anyway.

Author: OK, that works for me. I think I was mainly worried about people finding out which browsers, as individual permissions support info is not actually very well exposed in the site. To remedy that, I've reverted the change, but linked the "some browsers don't support the `"storage-access"` permission" text to the support table on the main SAA landing page.

```

> **Note:** `requestStorageAccess()` requests are automatically denied unless the embedded content is currently processing a user gesture such as a tap or click ({{Glossary("transient activation")}}), or if permission was already granted previously. If permission was not previously granted, they need to be run inside some kind of user gesture-based event handler, as shown above.

> **Note:** The Chrome-only [related website sets](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Storage_Access_API/Related_website_sets) feature can be considered a progressive enhancement mechanism that works alongside the Storage Access API — supporting browsers grant default third-party cookie access between websites in the same set. This means not having to go through the usual user permission prompt workflow described above, meaning a more user-friendly experience for users of sites in the set.

> ## Requesting storage access on behalf of a related domain

Reviewer: I think this title is incorrect. Or at least misleading.

AFAIK `requestStorageAccess` also allows use of related domains to skip the prompt in Chromium-based browsers. So it too can benefit from related domains, but this section only discusses `requestStorageAccessFor`.

What `requestStorageAccessFor` specifically allows is access at the top level document (i.e. not in embedded iframes) for images or other such directly embedded content. AFAIK that's only implemented for related domains (rather than also with prompts) so that's the ONLY way with this API at present.

So I think this title should be something like:

```suggestion
## Requesting storage access for resources in the top-lvel document
```

Or somethign like that.

Author: Reading descriptions of the method in the [spec](https://privacycg.github.io/requestStorageAccessFor/#intro) and [DCC](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/privacy-sandbox/related-website-sets-integration/#requeststorageaccessfor-in-chrome), it sounds like both of our suggestions are potentially misleading.

It sounds like you are saying here that `requestStorageAccessFor()` is only for requesting storage access for directly embedded resources that could set cookies, like images in `<img>` elements, and not resources embedded in `<iframe>`s. But the above links seem to suggest that it can do both.

I'm therefore adding text to the SAA landing pages and method page to make this clear, and changing the heading to `Requesting storage access from the top-level site on behalf of embedded resources`. Does that sound OK, or have I got the wrong end of the stick here?

Reviewer: That title works for me. Maybe @cfredric can review too just to be sure?

My main concern was the original title suggested you had to use `requestStorageAccessFor` when working with related domains but if I understand correctly you can continue to use `requestStorageAccess` if it's just for iframed content (and use the fact that they are related domains to avoid the prompt in supporting browsers like Chrome).

I do agree that it's odd that the [d.c.c. link](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/privacy-sandbox/related-website-sets-integration/#requeststorageaccessfor-in-chrome) suggests `requestStorageAccessFor` is for "cross-site images or script tags requiring cookies" and the [spec](https://privacycg.github.io/requestStorageAccessFor/#intro) includes iframes ("embedded resources such as iframes, scripts, or images") too which seems a little inconsistent. But maybe d.c.c. wanted to avoid the confusion with Storage Access API so kept it to the simpler use cases?

Author: I ended up adding a description in the `requestStorageAccessFor()` method page and the "Using" guide along these lines:

> `requestStorageAccessFor()` is intended to address challenges in adopting the Storage Access API on top-level sites that use cross-site images or scripts requiring cookies. It can enable third-party cookie access for cross-site resources embedded in {{htmlelement("iframe")}}s, and directly embedded e.g. via {{htmlelement("img")}}s or {{htmlelement("script")}} elements.

As I understand it, the method is for top-level pages to request storage access for their embedded content, whereas regular `requestStorageAccess()` has to be called from inside the embedded content, to request access for itself. In which case, I think the descriptions are now OK.

But, let me know what you think.

Reviewer: That makes sense to me! I thought it might be for the iframe needing access to even load case.

The Storage Access API features above allow an embedded document to request its own third-party cookie access. There is an additional experimental method available, {{domxref("Document.requestStorageAccessFor()")}}, which allows top-level sites to request storage access on behalf of specific related origins. This is intended to address challenges in adopting the Storage Access API on top-level sites that use cross-site images or {{htmlelement("script")}} elements requiring cookies.

For this method to work, both the calling top-level page and the embedded document storage access is being requested for need to be part of the same [related website set](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Storage_Access_API/Related_website_sets).

Typical usage of `requestStorageAccessFor()` looks like this (this time written in regular promise-style, rather than async/await):

```js
navigator.permissions
  .query({
    name: "top-level-storage-access",
    requestedOrigin: "https://example.com",
  })
  .then((permission) => {
    if (permission.state === "granted") {
      // Permission has already been granted, promise will resolve automatically

>       // No need to call requestStorageAccessFor() again, just start sending cookies

Reviewer 2: > just start sending cookies

Nit: was this the phrasing you meant to write? Or "just start sending requests"/"just start using cookies"?

Author: oop, it was meant to be "using". Updated.

## Requesting storage access on behalf of a related domain

The Storage Access API features above allow an embedded document to request its own third-party cookie access. There is an additional experimental method available, {{domxref("Document.requestStorageAccessFor()")}}, which allows top-level sites to request storage access on behalf of specific related origins. This is intended to address challenges in adopting the Storage Access API on top-level sites that use cross-site images or {{htmlelement("script")}} elements requiring cookies.

For this method to work, both the calling top-level page and the embedded document storage access is being requested for need to be part of the same [related website set](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Storage_Access_API/Related_website_sets).

Typical usage of `requestStorageAccessFor()` looks like this (this time written in regular promise-style, rather than async/await):

```js
navigator.permissions
  .query({
    name: "top-level-storage-access",
    requestedOrigin: "https://example.com",
  })
  .then((permission) => {
    if (permission.state === "granted") {

>       // Permission has already been granted, promise with resolve automatically

Reviewer 2: The `requestStorageAccessFor` API is a little different from `requestStorageAccess` -- if permission is already granted, there's no need to call `requestStorageAccessFor()` again. (You can just start sending CORS requests, and they'll have cookies attached.)

> **Note:** The Chrome-only [related website sets](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Storage_Access_API/Related_website_sets) feature can be considered a progressive enhancement mechanism that works alongside the Storage Access API — supporting browsers grant default third-party cookie access between websites in the same set. This means not having to go through the usual user permission prompt workflow described above, meaning a more user-friendly experience for users of sites in the set.

## Requesting storage access from the top-level site on behalf of embedded resources

The Storage Access API features above allow an embedded document to request its own third-party cookie access. There is an additional experimental method available, {{domxref("Document.requestStorageAccessFor()")}}, a proposed extension to the Storage Access API that allows top-level sites to request storage access on behalf of specific related origins.

> > **Note:** `requestStorageAccessFor()` is intended to address challenges in adopting the Storage Access API on top-level sites that use cross-site images or scripts requiring cookies. It can enable third-party cookie access for cross-site resources embedded in {{htmlelement("iframe")}}s, and directly embedded e.g. via {{htmlelement("img")}}s or {{htmlelement("script")}} elements.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Note:** `requestStorageAccessFor()` is intended to address challenges in adopting the Storage Access API on top-level sites that use cross-site images or scripts requiring cookies. It can enable third-party cookie access for directly embedded cross-site resources, e.g. via {{htmlelement("img")}}s or {{htmlelement("script")}} elements.
```

> For this method to work, both the calling top-level page and the embedded document storage access is being requested for need to be part of the same [related website set](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Storage_Access_API/Related_website_sets).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For `requestStorageAccessFor()` to work, both the calling top-level page and the embedded resource storage access is being requested for need to be part of the same [related website set](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Storage_Access_API/Related_website_sets).
```

Since the cross-site resource might not be an iframe.

Typical usage of `requestStorageAccessFor()` looks like this (this time written in regular promise-style, rather than async/await):

```js
navigator.permissions
  .query({
    name: "top-level-storage-access",
    requestedOrigin: "https://example.com",
  })
  .then((permission) => {
    if (permission.state === "granted") {
      // Permission has already been granted, promise will resolve automatically
      // No need to call requestStorageAccessFor() again, just start using cookies
      doThingsWithCookies();
    } else if (permission.state === "prompt") {
      // Need to call requestStorageAccessFor() after a user interaction
      btn.addEventListener("click", () => {
        // Request storage access
        rSAFor();
      });
    } else if (permission.state === "denied") {
      // User has denied third-party cookie access, so we'll
      // need to do something else
    }
  });

function rSAFor() {
  if ("requestStorageAccessFor" in document) {
    document.requestStorageAccessFor("https://example.com").then(
      (res) => {
        doThingsWithCookies();
      },
      (err) => {
        // Handle errors
      },
    );
  }
}
```

> In the above code, we call `navigator.permissions.query({name: 'top-level-storage-access', requestedOrigin: 'https://example.com'})` To discover if the user will be prompted or if storage access has already been granted to the specified origin.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the above code, we call `navigator.permissions.query({name: 'top-level-storage-access', requestedOrigin: 'https://example.com'})` to discover if the user will be prompted or if storage access has already been granted to the specified origin.
```

> - If the permission status is `"granted"` we call `document.requestStorageAccessFor('https://example.com')`, which should succeed without a user gesture.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If the permission status is `"granted"`, we can immediately use cross-site cookies in CORS-enabled requests.
```

Reviewer: Is this correct? For SAA we still need to call `requestStorageAccess` if the page is  the `granted` state.

Reviewer 2: Yes, I wrote what I meant to here :)

For `requestStorageAccess()`, the reason Chrome requires the iframe to always call rSA (even if permission has already been granted) is to protect the iframe from a CSRF attack. The iframe has to actively *choose* to include its cross-site cookies in requests, even if some other frame (elsewhere on the page, or on some other page within the last month) has already gotten the requisite permission. The call to rSA is treated as an active "opt-in" that indicates this specific iframe is ok with including cross-site cookies in its fetches.

For `requestStorageAccessFor(origin)`, the "active opt-in" from the 3p site comes in the form of the server's CORS support. If the server doesn't want to honor the cross-site requests, it can use CORS headers (or lack thereof) to protect itself. (Regarding an opt-in from the 1p site, that's less important from a security perspective, but it's still there. It comes in the form of ensuring the top-level document's subresource request uses CORS mode. Without CORS mode, the `"top-level-storage-access"` doesn't apply, so cross-site cookies wouldn't be attached to the request.)

Reviewer: OK. The fun of similar, but different, APIs! I presume `requestStorageAccessFor(origin)` is only needed for the first usage to set that to `granted`? After that it remembers it for the period (30 days?) and doesn't require re-requesting?

In which case, @chrisdavidmills on the line above you say:

> In the above code, we call `navigator.permissions.query({name: 'top-level-storage-access', requestedOrigin: 'https://example.com'})` To discover if the user will be prompted or if storage access has already been granted to the specified origin.

But there are no prompts with this API if I understand correctly, so I think this should be:

> In the above code, we call `navigator.permissions.query({name: 'top-level-storage-access', requestedOrigin: 'https://example.com'})` to discover if the page has previously called `requestStorageAccessFor()` and thereby granted permission, of if this call needs to be made to grant this access.
```

Or something like that.

Is that correct @cfredric ?

Reviewer 2: @tunetheweb Yup, I agree with that rephrasing. (And you're correct about the first usage and the permission's lifetime (30 days))

Author: I've ended up rehrasing this again slightly this morning. The final text I came up with was:

> In the above code, we call `navigator.permissions.query({name: 'top-level-storage-access', requestedOrigin: 'https://example.com'})` to discover if the origin has previously been granted permission, or if cookie access still needs to be requested.
>
> - If the permission status is `"granted"` we can just start using cookies; `requestStorageAccessFor()` was already called so there is no need to call it again.
> - If the permission status is `"prompt"` we need to call `document.requestStorageAccessFor('https://example.com')` call from within a user gesture, such as a button click.

- If the permission status is `"prompt"` we need to call `document.requestStorageAccessFor('https://target.site')` call from within a user gesture, such as a button click.

> **Note:** The feature name used when querying the permissions status in this case is different to the rest of the Storage Access API: `"top-level-storage-access"` rather than `"storage-access"`.

> **Note:** Unlike `requestStorageAccess()`, Chrome doesn't check for an interaction in a top-level document within the last 30 days when `requestStorageAccessFor()` is called because the user is already on the page. See [Browser-specific variations > Chrome]() for more details of this behavior.

> After a successful `requestStorageAccessFor()` call, cross-site requests will include cookies if they include [CORS](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CORS) / [`crossorigin`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Attributes/crossorigin), so sites may want to wait before triggering a request. Such requests must use the [`credentials: 'include'`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/fetch#credentials) option and resources must include the `crossorigin="use-credentials"` attribute.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After the `"top-level-storage-access"` permission is granted, cross-site requests will include cookies if they include [CORS](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CORS) / [`crossorigin`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Attributes/crossorigin), so sites may want to wait before triggering a request. Such requests must use the [`credentials: 'include'`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/fetch#credentials) option and resources must include the `crossorigin="use-credentials"` attribute.
```
